# explain shader

\#define SHADER_NAME(X) \

Compilation units written in the OpenGL Shading Language to run on this processor are called [X] *shaders*. When a set of [X] shaders are successfully compiled and linked, they result in a [X] *shader executable* that runs on the [X] processor.

## VS

The *vertex processor* is a programmable unit that **operates on incoming vertices and their associated data.** SHADER_NAME(vertex)

The vertex processor **operates on one vertex at a time**. It does not replace graphics operations that require knowledge of several vertices at a time.

## TCS

The *tessellation control processor* is a programmable unit that **operates on a patch of incoming vertices and their associated data, emitting a new output patch**.  ****SHADER_NAME(tessellation control)

The tessellation control shader **is invoked for each vertex of the output patch**. Each invocation can **read the attributes of any vertex in the input or output patches**, but can **only write per-vertex attributes for the corresponding output patch vertex**. The shader invocations collectively produce a set of per-patch attributes for the output patch.

After all tessellation control shader invocations have completed, the output vertices and per-patch attributes are assembled to form a patch to be used by subsequent pipeline stages.

## TES

The *tessellation evaluation processor* is a programmable unit that **evaluates the position and other attributes of a vertex generated by the tessellation primitive generator**, using a patch of incoming vertices and their associated data. SHADER_NAME(tessellation evaluation)

Each invocation of the tessellation evaluation executable computes the position and attributes of a single vertex generated by the tessellation primitive generator. The executable can read the attributes of any vertex in the input patch, plus the tessellation coordinate, which is the relative location of the vertex in the primitive being tessellated. The executable writes the position and other attributes of the vertex.

## GS

The *geometry processor* is a programmable unit that **operates on data for incoming vertices for a primitive assembled after vertex processing and outputs a sequence of vertices forming output primitives.** SHADER_NAME(geometry)

A single invocation of the geometry shader executable on the geometry processor will **operate on a declared input primitive with a fixed number of vertices**. This single invocation **can emit a variable number of vertices that are assembled into primitives of a declared output primitive type** and passed to subsequent pipeline stages.

## FS

The *fragment processor* is a programmable unit that **operates on fragment values and their associated data.** SHADER_NAME(fragment)

A fragment shader **cannot change a fragment’s (\*x\*, \*y\*) position**. **Access to neighboring fragments is not allowed.** The values computed by the fragment shader are ultimately used to update framebuffer memory or texture memory, depending on the current API state and the API command that caused the fragments to be generated.

### CS

The *compute processor* is a programmable unit that **operates independently from the other shader processors.** SHADER_NAME(compute)

It does not have fixed-function outputs. It is not part of the graphics pipeline and its visible side effects are through changes to images, storage buffers, and atomic counters.

A compute shader operates on a group of work items called a *workgroup*. **A workgroup is a collection of shader invocations that execute the same code, potentially in parallel.** An invocation within a workgroup may share data with other members of the same workgroup through shared variables and issue memory and control flow barriers to synchronize with other members of the same workgroup.
